---
date: 2023-04-21
title: "Collective Forum - The Right to Research"
layout: default
permalink: /collective-forum
---

<h1>{{ page.title }}</h1>


**Saturday, 10 June 2023**

*Instead of the ethos of the eternal researcher, whose career follows a
straight line, and who masters a determined domain of knowledge, we
prefer to imagine a minor, ephemeral and transitory research practice.*
(CERFI, 1975)

The 'Right to Research' was a manifesto written by members of the
research cooperative CERFI (Centre for Institutional Study, Research and
Development), published in *Le Monde*Â in 1975. The manifesto was a
reaction to the French State\'s termination of \'research by contract\'
in the social sciences. Thereafter state funding for research could be
granted only to those with a formal academic affiliation, either as part
of the CNRS (the French National Centre for Scientific Research) or a
University.

This key step towards the \'professionalisation of research\' was seen
by some as a positive move with benefits for the researcher in terms of
a solution to precarity. However, professionalisation also implies the
bureaucratisation and institutionalisation of the forms of research
production.

The manifesto speaks against what it sees as the threat of a generalised
bureaucratisation of research, which turns researchers into
functionaries of the State. Moreover, it speaks against the integration
and unification, under the aegis of professional research, of 'that
which by nature pertains to the diverse and the multiple' and the
elevation of the figure of the professional researcher to the position
of the exclusive holder of knowledge.

50 years on, we think this debate speaks to contemporary issues and that
it calls for a fundamental reflection on the right to research.

Perhaps the immediate parallel is with the current focus on \'research
culture\' or collaborative research, and on impact, which tends towards
the involvement of non-professionals (non-academics) in research, not as
objects, but as partners, in a way which might be seen to reverse the
process of the French State's decision of 1975. But does this really
breach the boundaries of the academic sector, and doesn't this
effectively function as a further form of the control of knowledge?

CERFI's manifesto also extends beyond current ideas of 'co-production'.
Its main concern was with the importance of guaranteeing the conditions
of existence for 'non-professionalised research' and for those who were
usually treated as objects of research to become subjects of research;
thus the question of the 'right to research'.

Putting an end to the financial autonomy of groups would end the
possibility of self-management and experimentation with a variety of
forms of work, research, and styles needed for social research.
Moreover, the professionalization of research would come with a focus on
the (professional) researcher as an individual to the detriment of
research collectives.

Particularly striking in the manifesto is the importance given to the
possibility for the autonomous management of funds and its
interdependence with the flows of knowledge, modes of research and
people management which should be fluid and in relation to the needs of
the research (rather than subordinated to a major institutional mode, in
this case, the model of the university institution with its hierarchy).

With the manifesto as a starting point, we propose a forum with research
collectives, associations, foundations, and varied groupings engaged in
research and experimentation, and individual researchers to share their
work, challenges, modes of organisation and management, funding
strategies and research ethos to re-think what the right to research
might mean today.

### Programme (Saturday, 10 June 2023)

- 10-12:30: Presentations by each group/representative (20 mins each)

- *Lunch break*

- 14:00--17:00: Collective Discussion

### Possible discussion points

-   The professionalization of research, and the extent to which the
    role of the academic (in the University sector) often comes down to
    the control and policing of knowledge.

-   Financial self-management

-   Collective organizational research modes and methods

-   The articulation of social production and theoretical production
