---
title: "Analytic Practice?"
type: blog
date: 2021-09-30
---

A few ideas from yesterday, following a discussion with [[Susana Caló|Susana]]:

In the 'Presentation' [[Fourquet]]/[[Murard]] contrast the tendency for some,
post 1968, to depart for the Cévennes to set up rural communities on a
pre-capitalist artisanal model, with the will, within CERFI, to
experiment with urban community fully embedded in the capitalist mode of
production etc. It strikes me then that the geography of CERFI's
different locations is an important factor in this 'urban community';
the location of the CERFI office is thus important, and the distribution
of the participants' apartments -- Boulevard Beaumarchais, Rue
Baudricourt etc.

One of the questions posed by our discussion yesterday revolved around
the extent to which the CERFI/Genealogy group, the 'toupie folle'
'succeeded', or not, in what they refer to as a group analytic practice;
in other words did their response to this, or the response to it, extend
beyond a consciousness and and recording of the consciousness of the
conflicts and 'rapports de force' which came to light? Was there an
'analytic practice' of the kind that was exercised at La Borde, for
example? If so, what did it look like. One way of thinking about this is
to conceive of the 'widening out' of individual problems or issues to
more global issues in the socius, in the light of the deleuzeguattari
idea of desire being directly plugged into the socius (i.e. bracketing
the family). It's true that in the 'interventions militantes' there is
nothing really in the way of oedipanization. Problems and conflicts are
written as symptoms of wider social conflicts or relations of force.
Another way of asking this is to ask if transversality, seen as a
displacement of the threshold assumptions of the super-ego (acc. to
[[Guattari]]) was in operation?
