---
date: 2022-02-25
title: "Blog Spin"
type: blog
tags:
  - Guattari
  - Deleuze
---

Blog 16 -- 25 February 2022

Conversation with [[Godofredo Pereira|Godofredo]]

Our work conditions and relation to R13

And decision to spin

<div class="gallery">

<img loading="lazy" src="../assets/img/2022-02-25/media/image1.jpeg" alt="">

</div>

It's Friday, 25th February.

We had our first conversation piece and it was with [[Godofredo Pereira]].

Our project continues to spin.

Having started in the Summer 2022, this is [[Susana Cal√≥|my]] third blog post. 
[[Patrick ffrench|Patrick]] has been writing with an amazing flow 
and I really enjoy how we are developing this project as we go along.

The alternative title 'la toupie folle' or the 'mad spinning top'
reminds us that the project is not just about content, but also about
the devices or mechanisms that we put in place to produce content.
'The mad spinning top' as Patrick noted points towards a practice of
involuntary spinning and rotation, a surprise element and a rotation.
We discussed that I should take over the blog from Patrick now -- do
the first spin -- and we should spin it again when it feels right.

We have some freedom to experiment, which is unusual in academic
research. We have proposed to make a pragmatic genealogy of concepts.
This means inventing a way to capture the life of concepts beyond the
text, exploring its resonances with life, or its social life, as we have
called it elsewhere. This requires studying how concepts are
appropriated socially and collectively and in turn transformed by the
same appropriation. Such project demands paying particular attention to
reports, collective discussions, looking at social life and making
interviews.

My contribution to the project has been affected by life and work
conditions. I recently moved abroad, my family had Covid and I lost a
series of research funding applications which would have given me some
peace of mind to dedicate to this project and others, and so the last 6
months were particularly difficult.

Patrick and I talked about this and how the different work conditions
impact on our project and therefore should - in the spirit of CERFI - be
acknowledged and not be hidden from sight. On a parallel thought, it
makes me reflect on how the work conditions academics are under now are
so different from the CERFI context. For a [book project on the
CERFI](https://www.rca.ac.uk/research-innovation/projects/cerfi-militant-analysis-collective-equipment-and-institutional-programming/)
I am working with Godofredo (I will write a separate post about this in
the future) I have interviewed a series of CERFI members and in an
interview [[Michel Rostain]] (who was in charge at some point of the
accountancy and the administration of the group) told me that work
groups were constituted around specific funded projects and that if
there was no money there was no work. It seemed very simple when he said
it, unpaid work was not even a question. Indeed, CERFI was created as a
research cooperative to allow its members to earn a living, first and
foremost, as a group. Today, we spend so much time writing comprehensive
funding applications -- all of us -- that last several months, subject
to incredibly competitive panels and yet all of this for a mere
application to funding. At its best, these applications turn into
veritable collective works in themselves. After all you discuss what
topic is worthy or not of study today and why and hence it's a pity when
you receive a no. But indeed, for some of us the work is already in
motion. To use our own terms, it has already a social life and thus it
continues ...

Going back to *Recherches* 13 -the fact that the conditions of work and
the tensions lived in the research process enter so explicitly in the
text of R13 is a value. The inclusion in the issue of the dialogues
between the researchers allow us to understand with great insight the
stakes involved. How deeply involved the 'researchers' were affectively
with the research process or research group and how affect and research
were intertwined.

The conversation with Godofredo was the first time we discussed *La
Toupie Folle* with someone else. Godofredo has been working on CERFI for
the last 5 years on a book project looking at CERFI at large and
particularly how it experimented with analysis in the programming of
oneself and collective equipment. Presenting the project to him was
great in the sense in which he knows the material very well and we could
exchange ideas and received advise and suggestions, but he also had good
insights in terms of the research process and working methods. We plan
to transcribe the conversation and publish it under 'dialogue pieces'
soon.

Summary of the conversation with [[Godofredo Pereira]]:

1. The manner in which [[Fourquet]] and [[Murard]] read [[Braudel]] is different
from the way [[Guattari]] and [[Deleuze]] use it in *AOE*

2. It's important to make a genealogy of desire / need in [[Lacan]] in
relation to its use in R13

3. we should think more about 'the mad spinning top' and incorporate
elements of rotation in our collective methodology, radicalise it as
working method

4. how do we refer to the work produced on R13, who is the author,
CERFI, R13, the genealogy group? -- think about this and perhaps write a
piece about it. Patrick remarked how he had the same question writing
the blog posts.

5. Godofredo gave us the idea of tracing which concepts used in the
research articles of R13 enter into the militant discussions included in
chapters 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, or which concepts live in these militant
discussions; qua have life outside theory. He gave an example of his
work with students when they go to fieldwork.

(Transcription to come of this conversation.)

It seems to me that the dialogue as a working method is also another
'spinning' device...
